Out of every concept that we've talked about in this course,
risk is the one that I'm confident that you already understand.
Everyone assesses risks on
a day-to-day basis as a reflection of whether something is prudent or not.
For instance, is this thing safe to eat?
Is it safe to fly today?
Should I buy this stock or should I pet this dinosaur?
In these cases, you are doing a quick calculation about a number of factors in your head.
It's simple decision-making, and in theory,
you tend to choose the best or safest option.
But sometimes you choose to take
a riskier approach because of some sort of a perceived reward.
It's probably not safe for instance,
to pet the dinosaur.
But think about the bragging rights that you'd have.
That's the essence of risk management.
Let's talk for a moment about our friendly dinosaur.
We've asked, is it safe to pet the dinosaur?
But what we're probably asking ourselves,
if I get close enough,
will the dinosaur bite me?
There are two components of the bite that we're really assessing.
What is the likelihood that the dinosaur bites me?
Then what's the impact if it does?
This is how we really express risk.
Risk is a function of the likelihood of something
occurring and the impact of the event once it occurs.
Now, I suspect that risk management has been a part of human history really forever,
and I attribute that to our survival instinct.
We assess risk in our daily lives and act based on some determination of benefit to self.
But there is additional historical context that you
should be aware of when discussing risk-management.
Modern-day risk management principles are built on
a number of theoretical mathematical principles.
Probability for instance, has its roots in 16th and 17th century study of mathematics.
Probability or chance roughly
equate to what I've described as the likelihood that an event might occur.
This really began with mathematicians studying games or chance,
creating mathematical equations to identify the likelihood
that an event might occur in rolling dice or playing cards.
Today you see mathematical evaluation of likelihood
frequently in places like financial institutions,
investment, insurance risk management,
and other areas where understanding
the likelihood of an occurrence requires exacting precision.
Security risk management however,
tends to describe likelihood in terms of qualifiers like high, medium, or low.
We'll discuss that more in just a bit.